============================
Release notes for IRRd 4.1.0
============================

IRRd 4.1.0 adds several major new features, including
:doc:`RPKI-aware mode </admins/rpki>`,
a new daemon architecture with full multiprocessing, synthetic NRTM,
and a scope filter.

The changes between 4.0.x and 4.1.0 are major. Please read these release
notes carefully before upgrading.
Upgrading to IRRd 4.1.0 requires several changes to the deployment setup.
Downgrading back to IRRd 4.0.x, if needed, also requires steps before
downgrading the installed IRRd package.

.. contents:: :backlinks: none

New features
------------

RPKI-aware mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
:doc:`RPKI-aware mode </admins/rpki>` is now available, where IRRd
imports RPKI ROAs and can filter or reject RPSL objects that are
in conflict with ROAs. Pseudo-IRR objects are generated for all ROAs.
When RPKI-aware mode is enabled, ``RPKI`` becomes an invalid as a regular
IRR source name, as it is reserved for pseudo-IRR objects from ROAs.
RPKI-aware mode also affects mirroring.

IRRd 4.1.0 includes several database migrations to support RPKI-aware mode,
whether enabled or disabled, and facilitate performance improvements needed
for RPKI-aware mode. Running these migrations is required to run IRRd 4.1.0,
even if RPKI-aware mode is never enabled.

.. danger::
    The impact of running IRRd in RPKI-aware mode can be dramatic, and it is
    strongly recommended to read the
    :doc:`RPKI integration </admins/rpki>` documentation very carefully
    before enabling it, to understand all consequences.
    **By default, RPKI-aware mode is enabled**.
    RPKI-aware mode can be disabled entirely, or certain sources can be
    excluded from RPKI validation.

New daemon architecture
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
IRRd has a new daemon architecture, where all whois queries, HTTP requests,
mirror processes and the preloader run in their own process. This improves
performance significantly, especially where many processes are running
on servers with many cores. Previously, the entire IRRd process was limited
to one CPU core.

To communicate between processes, IRRd now requires a running Redis instance.
The commands to start IRRd and several IRRd scripts have also changed.
The ``--uid`` parameter is no longer supported.

Synthetic NRTM
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The ``irrd_load_database`` command allowed loading RPSL data from local files,
often used to load data generated by scripts or other systems. Data imported
this way could not be mirrored over NRTM.

In IRRd 4.1, the ``irrd_update_database`` command has been added. This
supports periodically updating a source to the state in a particular file,
and automatically generates journal entries for any differences, allowing
NRTM mirroring. See the :doc:`mirroring documentation </users/mirroring>`
for further details.

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* A :doc:`scopefilter </admins/scopefilter>` has been added. This allows you
  to filter RPSL objects matching certain prefixes and AS numbers from your
  IRRd instance. By default, the scope filter is disabled.
* The default for ``server.whois.max_connections`` has been reduced from 50
  to 10. In 4.1, IRRd whois workers use considerably more memory, about 200 MB
  each, and one worker is started for each permitted connection. Therefore,
  at the default 10 connections, the whois processes use about 2 GB of memory,
  at 50 connections, this is about 10 GB.
* The ``last-modified`` attribute is set every time an object is created or
  updated in an authoritative source. You can apply this to all existing
  authoritative objects with the
  :ref:`new irrd_set_last_modified_auth command <last-modified>`.
* Serial handling in IRRd has changed for NRTM mirrors. If you mirror a
  source over NRTM, and keep a local journal, IRRd used to keep these serials
  identical. The NRTM ADD from the original source would be stored in the local
  journal under the same serial number, unless it was ignored by the object
  class filter.
  In 4.1, if you enable RPKI-aware mode or the scope filter for a source, or
  it has been enabled at any point since the last full reload, IRRd keeps its
  own serial number range in the local journal for that source. This may be out
  of sync with the NRTM source. Different IRRd instances mirroring from the
  same NRTM source may have different serial numbers for the same change.
  If neither RPKI-aware mode nor the scope filter is enabled, and hasn't been
  since the last full reload, IRRd synchronises the local serials with the
  NRTM source, the default behaviour in 4.0.
  See the :ref`NRTM serial handling documentation <mirroring-nrtm-serials>`
  for further details.
* When users create `route(6)` objects in authoritative databases, IRRd
  also verifies authorisation from
  :ref:`related object maintainers <auth-related-mntners-route>`. This behaviour
  is enabled by default, but can be disabled with the
  ``auth.authenticate_related_mntners`` setting.
* The ``!j`` command has changed, and now is exclusively used to check
  mirroring status. It returns what the most recent serial processed from a
  mirror is. For more extensive status information, like the local serials
  in the journal,
  :doc:`use the new !J command </users/queries/whois>`.
* IRRd starts a maximum of three mirror processes at the same time,
  to reduce peak loads. A further three, if needed, are started 15 seconds
  later, regardless of whether the previous ones have finished.
* HTTP(s) downloads are now supported for the ``sources.{name}.import_source``
  and ``sources.{name}.import_serial_source`` settings.
* A number of new configuration options were added, and some are required.
  See the :doc:`configuration documentation </admins/configuration>` for more
  information on these options.
* RIPE style query responses now always end with two empty lines,
  `consistent with the RIPE database`_.
* A custom flexible logging config can now be set with the
  ``log.logging_config_path``.
* A timeout was added for FTP connections.
* Memory usage during large RPSL imports has been reduced.
* A bug was fixed where some invalid objects could cause parser exceptions.


Steps required to upgrade
-------------------------
The following steps are required to upgrade to IRRd 4.1.0, regardless of
whether RPKI-aware mode is enabled or not.

* Disable all cron and e-mail triggered tasks. There should be no calls
  to any IRRd scripts during the upgrade process.
* Upgrade the IRRd package from within the virtualenv with
  ``pip install -U irrd``
* Install a Redis instance as documented in the
  :ref:`deployment guide <deployment-redis-configuration>` and configure
  the ``redis_url`` setting.
* Note that unix sockets are strongly recommended over TCP sockets for both
  PostgreSQL and Redis, for improved performance. The effect of this is more
  significant with the new multi-process daemon architecture.
* Set ``piddir`` to a directory where IRRd can write its PID file, ``irrd.pid``.
* Run the database migrations, using the same command used to
  :ref:`create the tables initially in deployment <deployment-database-upgrade>`.
  **Important note**: some of the migrations change large amounts of data,
  and may take up to 15-45 minutes to run in total. While the migrations are
  running, IRRd should be shut down and any cron / e-mail triggered tasks
  must be disabled. There must be no calls to ``irrd_submit_email`` or
  ``irrd_load_database``.
* Update any startup scripts or systemd for IRRd to call the new daemon process,
  with the new command line arguments, and use ``setcap`` to allow IRRd to bind
  to privileged ports: see the
  :ref:`updated deployment guide <deployment-starting-irrd>`.
* Remove the ``--irrd_pidfile`` parameter from calls to ``irrd_submit_email`` and
  ``irrd_load_database``.
* Ensure that RPKI-aware mode is configured as desired. By default it is
  **enabled**.
* Start IRRd and re-enable the cron / e-mail triggered tasks.
* If you would like to set ``last-modified`` for existing authoritative
  objects, use the
  :ref:`new irrd_set_last_modified_auth command <last-modified>`.


Downgrading from 4.1 to 4.0.x
-----------------------------
If you are running IRRd 4.1, and would like to downgrade back to 4.0.x,
the database schema needs to be modified. You can either restore an older
copy of your database, start with a fresh database, or use the database
migrations.

If you want to use the database migrations, run this command **before**
downgrading your local package installation to 4.0.x::

    /home/irrd/irrd-venv/bin/irrd_database_downgrade --version 28dc1cd85bdc

If you would like to re-upgrade to 4.1 later on, you will need to run
``irrd_database_upgrade`` again, as noted in the steps above.
The downgrade migration typically takes a few seconds.

.. _consistent with the RIPE database: https://www.ripe.net/manage-ips-and-asns/db/support/documentation/ripe-database-query-reference-manual#2-0-querying-the-ripe-database
