============================
Release notes for IRRd 4.2.0
============================

IRRd 4.2.0 adds several major features:

* A new :doc:`GraphQL </users/queries/graphql>` query interface.
  This new interface supports much greater query flexibility than traditional
  whois, with output in a structured JSON format, over a secure HTTPS connection.
* A new :doc:`HTTPS API call for whois queries </users/queries/whois/>`.
  This supports the same whois queries as port 43, but using
  standard HTTPS instead of the more complex raw TCP sockets.
* A new
  :doc:`HTTPS API call for submitting RPSL objects </users/database-changes>`.
  This allows submitting one or multiple objects, and returns a JSON response
  with the result of the requested changes.
* Prefix searches can have up to a 100x
  :ref:`performance improvement <performance_prefix_queries>` in several
  circumstances.

The new HTTP interfaces are intended to be used with HTTPS, to provide
secure and authenticated transport. The deployment guide
:ref:`has been updated <deployment-https>` with an nginx example.

PyPy is now an officially supported deployment platform. It is an alternative
to CPython, the most commonly used Python interpreter.
PyPy offers improved performance in the order of 10% for some queries,
and even higher for some GraphQL queries. CPython remains fully supported,
and may be the easier option depending on your deployment platform.
IRRd 4.2 was continuously tested
against CPython 3.6 and 3.9, and PyPy 3.6 and 3.7.

Other changes compared to 4.1.7
-------------------------------
* IRRd now rejects unknown settings in the config file, i.e. settings
  that are found in the file, but unknown to IRRd. This reduces unintentional
  configuration errors.
* The optional ``geofeed`` attribute was added for `inetnum` and `inet6num`
  objects, which can contain a URL which in turn contains geographical
  information, as defined in `draft-ymbk-opsawg-finding-geofeeds-03`_.
* Retrieval of files over FTP now follows the ``ftp_proxy`` environment
  variable, if set.
* New `as-set` objects created in authoritative databases are required
  to have a hierarchical name, like ``AS65540:AS-CUSTOMERS``. For example,
  ``AS-CUSTOMERS`` is no longer allowed. This new behaviour can be disabled
  with the ``compatibility.permit_non_hierarchical_as_set_name`` setting.
* IRRd now supports dropping privileges after binding to the whois port,
  by setting the ``user`` and ``group`` settings.
  This allows you to start IRRd as root, have it bind to port 43, and then
  drop privileges. This is now the recommended deployment method.
* The periodic tasks to update the RPKI and scope filter status use
  considerably less memory while running.

.. _draft-ymbk-opsawg-finding-geofeeds-03: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ymbk-opsawg-finding-geofeeds-03

Changes needed to upgrade
-------------------------
IRRd 4.2 from 4.1 is a smaller upgrade than 4.1 from 4.0. If you are upgrading
from a 4.0.x version, please make sure to also follow all steps in the
:doc:`4.1 release notes </releases/4.1.0>`.

If you are upgrading from an earlier version than 4.1.7, make sure to
read the release notes for any intermediate releases as well.

.. tip::
    Depending on the availability requirements of your IRRd deployment,
    it may be smart to upgrade your own test setup first and verify
    whether 4.2 works as expected for you. That also ensures you are familiar
    with the exact upgrade steps in your deployment platform.

Several configuration options have been added or changed:

* The ``server.http.access_list`` setting is now called
  ``server.http.status_access_list``. The access list only applies to the
  status page - not the entire HTTP interface. The setting was renamed
  to reflect this change.
* The default port and interface for the HTTP interface is now
  ``127.0.0.1:8000``. This was changed because the HTTP interface should
  be run behind an HTTPS proxy.
* A new setting ``server.http.workers`` was added, set to 4 by default.
  This is the number of HTTP worker processes started. Note that like
  whois, each HTTP worker process uses up to 200MB of memory. Depending
  on available resources, a higher number of workers may be appropriate.
* A new setting ``server.http.forwarded_allowed_ips`` was added. This
  needs to be set when the HTTP proxy in front of IRRd is not running on
  the local host.
* The new setting ``compatibility.inetnum_search_disabled`` allows IRRd
  to default to
  :ref:`high performance prefix queries <performance_prefix_queries>`.
  You should enable this setting if you are certain your instance does
  not process `inetnum` objects.

As IRRd now rejects unknown settings, it is possible that there are other
settings in your configuration file that were always unknown, but will now
be rejected by IRRd 4.2.

Other than the settings changes, IRRd 4.2 includes database migrations.
There are two upgrade paths for this:

* A simpler path where IRRd is shut down during all migrations. These
  take about 15-45 minutes, during which IRRd will not be available.
* A more complex path where IRRd is only restarted once.
  This limits the downtime, but consists of more steps.

In either path, performance may be reduced up to half an hour after
all database migrations complete, due to PostgreSQL analysing and
vacuuming modified tables.

Simpler upgrade
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* Update your settings file as noted above.
* Disable all cron and e-mail triggered tasks. There should be no calls
  to any IRRd scripts during the upgrade process.
* Shut down your IRRd instance.
* Upgrade the IRRd package from within the virtualenv with
  ``pip install irrd==4.2.0``
* Run the database migrations, using the
  :ref:`irrd_database_upgrade <deployment-database-upgrade>` command.
  **Important note**: some of the migrations change large amounts of data,
  and may take up to 15-45 minutes to run in total. While the migrations are
  running, IRRd should remain shut down and any cron / e-mail triggered tasks
  must be disabled. There must be no calls to ``irrd_submit_email`` or
  ``irrd_load_database``.
* Start IRRd and re-enable the cron / e-mail triggered tasks.

Low downtime upgrade
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* Update your settings file as noted above.
* Disable all cron and e-mail triggered tasks.
* Upgrade the IRRd package from within the virtualenv with
  ``pip install irrd==4.2.0``
* In your settings file, set ``compatibility.irrd42_migration_in_progress``
  to ``true``.
* Run only the first database migration, using the
  :ref:`irrd_database_upgrade <deployment-database-upgrade>` command as:
  ``irrd_database_upgrade --version f4c837d8258c``. This should take a few
  seconds.
* Shut down your IRRd instance (the running 4.1 instance) and start the 4.2
  instance.
* Re-enable the cron / e-mail triggered tasks.
* Run the remaining migrations by running ``irrd_database_upgrade``
  without a version parameter.
  These may take up to 15-45 minutes to run. Performance may be affected.
* After all migrations are complete, remove the
  ``compatibility.irrd42_migration_in_progress`` setting.
* Send a SIGHUP to the running IRRd process.

HTTP service
^^^^^^^^^^^^
With either path, you should also install nginx or a
similar service to serve as an HTTPS proxy. An nginx example
:ref:`is included in the deployment guide <deployment-https>`.
As no current services depend on this, you can do this after completing
all other upgrade steps.


Downgrading from 4.2 to 4.1.x
-----------------------------
If you are running IRRd 4.2, and would like to downgrade back to 4.1.x,
the database schema needs to be modified. You can either restore an older
copy of your database, start with a fresh database, or use the database
migrations.

If you want to use the database migrations, run this command **before**
downgrading your local package installation to 4.1.x::

    irrd_database_downgrade --version a7766c144d61

If you would like to re-upgrade to 4.2 later on, you will need to run
the database migrations again, as listed in the upgrade steps.
