============================
Release notes for IRRd 4.3.0
============================

.. note::
   4.3.0 was initially released on June 6th, 2023, but was yanked due
   to a packaging error on June 9th, leading to the release of
   IRRd 4.3.0.post1. The main visible issue from the error was that the
   documentation of 4.4 was published as 4.3.0.
   If you had previously installed 4.3.0 through PyPI/pip, you can
   keep running on that version, or update to 4.3.0.post1 without
   needing restarts or migrations, as the 4.3.0 and 4.3.0post1 PyPI
   packages have identical code.

IRRd 4.3's major new features are:

* Granular options for stricter authentication checks for related
  objects, such as requiring an ASN prefix in a set name and
  requiring authentication for the prefixed ASN.
* Route object preference, where route objects from one source may
  suppress overlapping route objects from a lower priority source.
  Similar to RPKI and scope filter, suppression applies to mirrored
  sources as well.
* An event stream based on WebSocket, where clients can subscribe
  to receive updates of all committed changes to IRR objects
  for all sources, in a structured format. Also includes an initial
  download endpoint in JSONL format.
* bcrypt hashes for maintainer passwords, and the option to mark
  hashers as legacy or disable them entirely.
* Maintainer suspension, where a `mntner` along with any objects
  it maintains can be suspended. This is similar to deletion, except that
  the objects can be reactivated later.
* A replacement for ``irr_rpsl_submit`` from IRRd v3 to ease
  migrations. This is an independent Python script that uses IRRd's
  HTTP API, not depending on other IRRd code, to make it easy to drop in.


Changes to related object authentication and settings
-----------------------------------------------------
In version 4.2, IRRd required newly created authoritative `as-set` objects
to have a hierarchical name where the first element is an AS number.
In 4.3, this feature has been significantly expanded.

For all RPSL set objects, IRRd can now be configured to require:

* Including an ASN prefix in the name of the set, e.g. ``AS65537:AS-EXAMPLE``
  being valid, but ``AS-EXAMPLE`` being invalid.
* Passing authentication for the corresponding `aut-num`, e.g. AS65537 in the
  example, skipping this check if the `aut-num` does not exist.
* Passing authentication for the corresponding `aut-num`, e.g. AS65537 in the
  example, failing this check if the `aut-num` does not exist.

The first two options, requiring a prefix with opportunistic `aut-num` authentication,
is now the default for all set objects.
You can :ref:`change the configuration <conf-auth-set-creation>` for specific
RPSL set objects, or set your own common configuration that applies to all sets.

The ``compatibility.permit_non_hierarchical_as_set_name`` setting has been
removed, as it is now covered by the ``prefix_required`` setting.
The ``auth.authenticate_related_mntners`` setting has been renamed to
``auth.authenticate_parents_route_creation``, as this setting exclusively
relates to :ref:`authentication for route(6) objects <auth-related-mntners-route>`
and needs to be distinct from the configuration for RPSL set objects.

If you were using ``auth.authenticate_related_mntners`` or
``compatibility.permit_non_hierarchical_as_set_name``, you need to update
your configuration.

All checks are only applied when users create new set objects in authoritative
databases. Authoritative updates to existing objects, deletions, or objects from
mirrors are never affected. When looking for related objects for authentication,
IRRd only looks in the same IRR source.

**By default, IRRd 4.3 requires an ASN prefix and uses opportunistic
authentication.**


Route object preference
-----------------------
IRRd can now use
:doc:`route object preference </admins/route-object-preference>`
to suppress overlapping `route(6)` objects from different sources,
based on a configured priority for each source.

By default, this feature is not enabled for any sources.


Event stream
------------
IRRd now offers a :doc:`WebSocket-based event stream </users/queries/event-stream>`.
All changes to IRR objects are published on this endpoint. There is
also a new initial download endpoint that publishes all IRR data, with
optional filtering, in JSONL format.
Both initial downloads and ongoing changes include all data parsed
from objects by IRRd, instead of only the raw object text. This makes this
format easier to work with and integrate with other tooling.

In their current design, these features are not optimised for high volume
use. Access is controlled by the new ``server.http.event_stream_access_list``
setting. By default all access is denied.


New password hasher and new password settings
---------------------------------------------
IRRd 4 has always supported CRYPT-PW and MD5-PW hashing for passwords in
`mntner` objects. This version adds support for BCRYPT-PW, using bcrypt,
a secure and modern password hashing method.

IRRd 4.3 has a new setting ``auth.password_hashers`` to configure
which password hashes are enabled. **The default is stricter than in
older versions**: ``bcrypt-pw`` and ``md5-pw`` are fully enabled,
``crypt-pw`` is only enabled in legacy mode. The legacy mode means that IRRd
will accept authentication through CRYPT-PW on `mntners` as before, but will
not accept ``auth`` lines using CRYPT-PW on new or modified `mntner`
objects in authoritative databases. This requires users to upgrade to
a stronger hash when they next update their `mntner` object.


Maintainer suspension
---------------------
IRRd now supports
:doc:`suspending a maintainer and all objects it maintains </admins/suspension>`.
This feature is only accessible to admins using the override password, and only
when enabled on an authoritative source with the ``suspension_enabled`` setting.

Suspended objects act as if they have been deleted, but can be restored by an
admin at a later time.

By default, this feature is not enabled for any sources.


Replacement for irr_rpsl_submit
-------------------------------
IRRd now includes an :ref:`irr_rpsl_submit <database-changes-irr-rpsl-submit>`
script, similar to the submit tool from IRRD v3.
The main purpose of this script is to provide (limited) compatibility
with existing integrations that called irr_rpsl_submit directly to submit
to older IRRd versions. It is a light wrapper that calls the IRRd HTTP API.

Note that this command is not intended to be used for handling incoming
email changes - see the `deployment guide </admins/deployment>`_ for the
``irrd_submit_email`` instead. This is unchanged from previous versions of IRRd.

This code was contributed by MERIT_ for
use with RADb.

.. _MERIT: https://www.merit.edu


New journal expiry command
--------------------------
IRRD includes a new command: ``irrd_expire_journal``. You can call this to
remove journal entries older than a given date, in both
authoritative and mirrored sources. Do use caution, as the journal is the
only place where IRRd keeps a change history. Journal entries can not be
recovered after being expired.


Minimum Python version
----------------------
The minimum Python version for IRRd is now 3.7. Python 3.6 is `end of life`_
and therefore no longer supported. In turn, IRRd 4.3.x will be the last
minor version to support Python 3.7.

.. _end of life: https://endoflife.date/python


Other dependency versions
-------------------------
IRRd now requires Redis 5 or newer. PostgreSQL 11 or newer is strongly
recommended before upgrading, as it makes database migrations
significantly faster.


Other changes compared to 4.2.8
-------------------------------
* The ``sources.{name}.nrtm_query_serial_range_limit`` setting was
  added to limit the load of NRTM queries.
* IRRd processes will now log a traceback of all their threads when
  receiving a SIGUSR1 signal. This can be helpful when debugging
  hanging workers or other complex issues.
* When configured to drop privileges after starting, IRRd will now
  check whether the less privileged user is able to write to the
  log file, before dropping the privileges. Previously, it would
  drop privileges, then fail to write to the log file, and be unable
  to report this error.
* Inserting the journal entries is now much faster when inserting
  multiple entries per source. This happens in NRTM mirroring
  or when users submit large sets of changes. IRRd will process
  these changes faster up to an order of magnitude.
* IRRd applies stricter checks to the range operator in `route-set`
  members in strict validation mode. Values are now checked
  for appropriate prefix length, rejecting values like
  ``192.0.2.0/26^24-32``.
* The ``compatibility.irrd42_migration_in_progress`` setting
  was removed as it only applied to 4.2 upgrades.


Upgrading to IRRd 4.3.0 from 4.2.x
----------------------------------
As with any other major IRRd release, depending on the availability
needs of your setup, it is recommended to first test the upgrade
and operation on a testing/acceptance setup with similar data size.

The recommended steps to upgrade are:

* Make sure your Python (minimum 3.7) and Redis (minimum 5)
  versions are recent enough.
* Update your configuration, as several configuration options have been removed,
  as noted above.
* Disable all cron and e-mail triggered tasks. There should be no calls
  to any IRRd scripts during the upgrade process.
* Stop the IRRd process.
* Upgrade the IRRd package from within the virtualenv with
  ``pip install irrd==4.3.0.post1``
* Run the database migrations, using the
  :ref:`irrd_database_upgrade <deployment-database-upgrade>` command.
  **Important note**: some of the migrations change large amounts of data,
  and may take up to 10-45 minutes to run in total. While the migrations are
  running, IRRd should not be running and any cron / e-mail triggered tasks
  must be disabled. There must be no calls to ``irrd_submit_email``,
  ``irrd_load_database``, or any other scripts.
* Restart IRRd.
* Re-enable the cron / e-mail triggered tasks.
* To support the new event stream, update your nginx or other HTTP service
  configuration to enable WebSocket connections. See the new
  :ref:`nginx example <deployment-https>`. Note that the recommended
  ``gzip_types`` was also expanded.

The database migrations only add columns, so there is an option to keep
your IRRd daemon running while running the database migrations.
This is more complex, but will reduce downtime.
Load and locks will hold back database changes and may cause delayed responses
to queries. Delayed responses may persist for an hour or so after
the upgrade.

If you prefer this option, before starting the process,
set ``import_timer`` for all sources and ``rpki.roa_import_timer``
to several hours. This reduces writes and possible deadlocks.
Then, follow the process as before, but instead of stopping and
starting, only restart IRRd once, after the database migration.


Downgrading from 4.3 to 4.2.x
-----------------------------
If you are running IRRd 4.3, and would like to downgrade back to 4.2.x,
the database schema needs to be modified. You can either restore an older
copy of your database, start with a fresh database, or use the database
migrations.

If you want to use the database migrations, run this command **before**
downgrading your local package installation to 4.2.x::

    irrd_database_downgrade --version 8744b4b906bb

If you would like to re-upgrade to 4.3 later on, you will need to run
the database migrations again, as listed in the upgrade steps.

