============================
Release notes for IRRD 4.4.6
============================

IRRD 4.4.6 was released on March 28, 2026, and contains web UI security
hardening. There is no known exploitable vulnerability addressed by this
release; these are proactive measures to improve the security posture of
the web UI. All users of 4.4 are recommended to upgrade.

IRRD 4.3 and earlier are not affected, as they did not include the web UI.

Web UI security hardening
-------------------------

* A strict ``Content-Security-Policy`` header is now set, preventing
  execution of inline scripts and styles. Inline scripts and styles in
  templates have been refactored to external files to comply with this
  policy.
* Additional HTTP security headers are now set on all responses:
  ``Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy``, ``Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy``,
  ``Cross-Origin-Resource-Policy``, ``Referrer-Policy``,
  ``Origin-Agent-Cluster``, ``X-Permitted-Cross-Domain-Policies``,
  ``X-Frame-Options``, and ``X-Content-Type-Options``.
* Session cookies are now set with ``SameSite=Strict``. On deployments
  where ``server.http.url`` uses an ``https://`` scheme, the ``Secure``
  flag is also set.
* The session is now cleared on login to prevent session fixation.
* Responses to authenticated requests now include
  ``Cache-Control: no-store`` to prevent browsers and intermediate proxies
  from caching pages that may contain user-specific data.
* Active sessions are now invalidated immediately when a user's password
  changes. Previously, existing sessions remained valid until they
  expired. The session of the user who performed the change remains valid.
