============================
Release notes for IRRD 4.5.1
============================

IRRD 4.5.1 was released on March 4, 2026 and fixes a security issue in
the web UI.
Host header injection in web UI allowed password reset poisoning via
attacker-controlled email links (CVE-2026-28681, GHSA-22m3-c7vp-49fj).

This issue affects IRRD 4.5.0 and all 4.4.x versions prior to 4.4.5.
IRRD 4.3 and earlier are not affected, as they did not include the web UI.

This issue was discovered and reported by
`Rui Yang`_ and `Haoyu Wang`_.

.. _`Rui Yang`: https://github.com/BrookeYangRui
.. _`Haoyu Wang`: https://github.com/LeaveerWang

Summary
-------
An attacker could manipulate the HTTP ``Host`` header on a password reset
or account creation request. The confirmation link in the resulting email
could then point to an attacker-controlled domain. Opening the link in
the email is sufficient to pass the token to the attacker, who could then
use it on the real IRRD instance to take over the account. A compromised
account could then be used to modify RPSL objects maintained by the
account's mntners and perform other account actions.

If the user had two-factor authentication configured, which is required
for users with override access, an attacker would not be able to log in,
even after successfully resetting the password.

Cause
-----
Email links in account creation, password reset, and mntner migration
emails were generated from the HTTP request context, allowing an attacker
to manipulate the HTTP ``Host`` header to redirect these links to an
attacker-controlled domain (password reset poisoning).

Resolution
----------
Requests with a ``Host`` header that does not match ``server.http.url``
are now rejected, preventing Host header injection attacks against the
web UI.

All existing password reset tokens are invalidated by this upgrade,
rendering any tokens that may have been captured by an attacker unusable.

Enabling two-factor authentication was already recommended for all users,
as it prevents account takeover even if a password reset token is
compromised.

Detecting exploitation
----------------------
Because the victim never interacts with the real IRRD instance in this
attack, it is difficult to detect exploitation from logs alone.

Indicators that an account was targeted or compromised:

* A ``password reset email requested`` followed by
  ``password (re)set successfully`` where the delay
  is longer than expected. Legitimate users actively waiting for a reset
  email tend to complete it quickly; victims who receive an unexpected
  email are less likely to click it immediately, resulting in a longer
  delay.
* Users receiving a password reset mail without requesting one.
* If a successfully attacked user later attempts to log in with their
  original password, this will appear in the logs as
  ``user failed login due to invalid account or password``.

After upgrading to this release, all existing password reset tokens are
invalidated. Users who can still log in with their password after the
upgrade can be certain their account has not been taken over.
