============================
Release notes for IRRD 4.5.3
============================

IRRD 4.5.3 was released on June 23, 2026, and
contains a fix for an NRTMv4 client bug, restores
the GraphiQL explorer that was broken by the 4.5.2
Content-Security-Policy, and tweaks session cookie handling. All users
of 4.5 are recommended to upgrade.

* The `NRTMv4 client could silently skip deltas`_ whenever it loaded
  a snapshot. After loading a snapshot at version ``N``, IRRD recorded
  the latest version listed in the Update Notification File as the
  local version, instead of the snapshot version. On the next run,
  deltas were applied starting from the recorded version + 1, skipping
  all deltas between ``N+1`` and the UNF version at import time.
  This could result in data loss. After upgrading, operators running
  NRTMv4 mirror clients should reload them with
  ``irrd_mirror_force_reload`` to recover any potentially missed data.
* The `GraphiQL explorer at /graphql/ was broken`_ in 4.5.2 by the
  strict Content-Security-Policy.
* Security headers and cookie settings were adjusted further.
  Note that on deployments
  where ``server.http.url`` uses an ``https://`` scheme,
  the session cookie name has changed. Existing sessions are
  invalidated and all users will need to log in again.
  Administrators are strongly recommended to use HTTPS, and on non-HTTPS
  deployments, a startup warning is now logged.

.. _NRTMv4 client could silently skip deltas: https://github.com/irrdnet/irrd/issues/1087
.. _GraphiQL explorer at /graphql/ was broken: https://github.com/irrdnet/irrd/issues/1078
